---
title: "3.1 Tasks: Grafana intro"
weight: 2
sectionnumber: 3.1
onlyWhenNot: baloise
---

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.1: Install Grafana

Similar to the basic setup, we are just going to update our configuration of the ArgoCD application to install and create our Grafana instance. Update your monitoring application (`charts/user-monitoring/values.yaml`) and update the `grafana.enabled` flag to `true`:

`charts/user-monitoring/values.yaml`:
```yaml
user: <user> # Replace me
# prometheus
prometheus:
  enabled: true
# thanos-query
query:
  enabled: true
# grafana
grafana:
  enabled: true
# pushgateway
pushgateway:
  enabled: false
# blackboxexporter
blackboxexporter:
  enabled: false
# alertmanager
alertmanager:
  enabled: false
# thanos-ruler
ruler:
  enabled: false

```

Verify the installation and sync process in the [ArgoCD UI](https://{{% param argoCdUrl %}}).
When the application is synchronized successfully navigate to your freshly created Grafana instance: <https://{{% param grafanaUrl %}}>. Use the admin account to login in. Skip the password change.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}This grafana setup does not have persistence storage attached, therefore all compontents (dashboards, datasources, plugins, and so on) need to be provisioned with configuration using our gitops approach. It also means if we change something manually and the pod gets restarted, all changes will be lost.{{% /alert %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.2: Add additional datasource to Grafana

By default, our setup adds the grafana datasource `thanos-querier`. This will allow us to use the combined view of metrics in the future to create dashbaords based on this data.

Navigate to the Datasouce Section in your Grafana installation and verify whether the datasources exists or not.

<https://{{% param grafanaUrl %}}/connections/datasources>

Eventhough the `thanos-querier` datasource will be the main datasource to use in our lab, we're going to add an additional datasource to Grafana, for you to understand how that can be configured and to have your `<user>-monitoring` prometheus server dircetly accessible in grafana as well.

Datasources can be added via config files to Grafana, in our case this will be handled with a secret containing the datasources in the following format:

```yaml
apiVersion: 1

datasources:
  - name: Graphite
    url: http://localhost:$PORT
    user: $USER
    secureJsonData:
      password: $PASSWORD
```

In our example the datasources are already handled by the Helm Chart. Update your ArgoCD application and add the datasource config block to the `values.yaml` like the following:

```yaml
# grafana
grafana:
  enabled: true
  datasources:
  - name: prometheus
    access: proxy
    editable: false
    type: prometheus
    url: http://prometheus-operated:9090
```

Commit your changes in the ArgoCD application to your git repository and let it synchronize.

Again go to <https://{{% param grafanaUrl %}}/connections/datasources> and check for the newly added datasource.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}While Grafana can discover dashboards at runtime, preprovisioned datasources, like the one we just added, are only discovered during the startup.

Therefore we need to restart our grafana pod manually for the datasource to appear.

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n $USER-monitoring get pod
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n $USER-monitoring delete pod <grafana-pod>
```

{{% /alert %}}


### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.3: Configure Prometheus to scrape Grafana metrics

This is repetition. Grafana instruments the Prometheus client library and provides a variety of metrics at the `/metrics` endpoint: <http://{{% param grafanaUrl %}}/metrics>

This endpoint can be configured as target in prometheus, with the same methode like we did with our example application.

We simply configure a Service Monitor, which tells the prometheus server where to scrape the metrics from.

The Grafana Service Monitor has already been deployed together with grafana itself.

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n $USER-monitoring get servicemonitor grafana-monitor -oyaml
```

Check if the Grafana instance appears in the targets section of Prometheus (<http://{{% param prometheusUrl %}}/targets>). In addition you can use the following query to show list all metrics of the new target:

```promql
{job="grafana"}
```

{{% /details %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.4: Use datasources in grafana

Since we have our datasouces now configured in Grafana, we can use the explore tab in grafana, to check, whether it's working correctly.

* Open your grafana <http://{{% param grafanaUrl %}}>
* Use the navigation to open the `Explore` site.
* Select the `prometheus` datasource
* Switch to code mode in your query input section
* Execute the following query

```promql
python_info
```

The result will be the same like the one from Lab 1.

As we are mostlikely always more interested in the global view, we are again going to use the `thanos-querier` datasource instead of the `prometheus` one.

* Change the datasource to `thanos-querier`
* Execute the same query again.

Again the same result.

But, since the querier now combines the metrics from our two prometheus stacks (Cluster infrastructure and user-monitoring) we now have the possibility to also query cluster metrics:

```promql
kube_node_info
```

Which will give you info about our underlying kubernetes cluster nodes. Such metrics are only available on the `thanos-querier` datasource.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}From now on we'll be using primarily the `thanos-querier` datasource.{{% /alert %}}
