---
title: "5.2 Tasks: Prometheus Operator"
weight: 5
sectionnumber: 5.2
onlyWhenNot: baloise
---

### {{% param sectionnumber %}}.1: Prometheus storage

By default, the Prometheus operator stack does not persist the data of the deployed monitoring stack. Therefore, any pod restart would result in a reset of all data. Let's learn about persistence for Prometheus.

**Task description**:

* See this [example](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/master/Documentation/user-guides/storage.md#manual-storage-provisioning) of how to configure storage for Prometheus

To get the current values, either look at the file in git or use `{{% param cliToolName %}} -n $USER-monitoring get prometheus prometheus -oyaml`.

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

To enable storage for our Prometheus we would simply add the following section to our Prometheus definition.

```yaml
...
spec:
  ...
  securityContext:
    fsGroup: 65534
  storage:
    disableMountSubPath: true
    volumeClaimTemplate:
      spec:
        resources:
          requests:
            storage: 10Gi
  ...
```
{{% /details %}}

### {{% param sectionnumber %}}.2: Prometheus Retention

By default, the Prometheus operator stack will set the retention of your metrics to `24h`. When metrics are persisted in Prometheus we can define the retention.
Read about [retention operational-aspects](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/storage/#operational-aspects) for options to manage retention.

**Task description**:

* Read the Operator's documentation about retention and size based retention.

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}
Check [documentation](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/master/Documentation/api.md#prometheusspec) for available options
{{% /alert %}}

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

To configure a retention of two days with a maximum of 9Gi of storage, we could provide the following configuration to our Prometheus resource:

```yaml
...
spec:
  ...
  retention: 2d
  retentionSize: 9GB
  ...
```
{{% /details %}}

### {{% param sectionnumber %}}.3: (Optional) Configure storage and retention in your Prometheus instance

Since we don't always trust written documentation without testing it ourselves, we are going to configure storage and retention in our `<user>-monitoring` namespace.

The Prometheus resource is provided by the `user-monitoring` chart in your git repository. To edit the resource we need to edit the file `charts/user-monitoring/templates/_user-prometheus.yaml`.

**Enable storage**:

As we have read in the documentation, we can add the following properties to the Prometheus resource:

```yaml
...
spec:
  ...
  securityContext:
    fsGroup: 65534
  storage:
    disableMountSubPath: true
    volumeClaimTemplate:
      spec:
        resources:
          requests:
            storage: 10Gi
  ...
```

**Configure retention**:

To configure the retention and retention limits we can add the following properties to the Prometheus resource:

```yaml
...
spec:
  ...
  retention: 2d
  retentionSize: 9GB
  ...
```

**Verify the changes**:

Commit and push the changes to your git repository and let ArgoCD sync your application. As soon as the pod is up and running again, we can verify that the PVC was created and bound with:

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n $USER-monitoring get pvc
```

Check if the volume is available inside the pod with running `df -h /prometheus` inside the first Prometheus pod.

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n $USER-monitoring exec prometheus-prometheus-0 -c prometheus -- df -h /prometheus
```

Verifying the retention config can be done by inspecting the Prometheus pod's arguments:

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n $USER-monitoring describe pods prometheus-prometheus-0
```

The output should contain the following lines:

```yaml
...
Containers:
  ...
  prometheus:
    ...
    Args:
      ...
      --storage.tsdb.retention.size=9GB
      --storage.tsdb.retention.time=2d
      ...
```
